Introduction

An Overview of the Grantseeking Process

LET’S START WITH THE OBVIOUS: every nonprofit organization, from start-ups to well-established, local community organizations to national affiliate organizations, consider foundation grants both a desirable and essential source of funding support. Compared to other revenue generating options, grants appear to take less effort and yield a larger reward. In many respects, that is true. However, the word “appear” is important: while grant seeking is relatively inexpensive in comparison to other fundraising strategies and can, in fact, yield large award amounts, it does have expenses associated with it, including a significant amount of dedicated staff (and possibly consulting) time for research, program planning, budgeting, and attention to details and various deadlines. A strong proposal—that is, a well-written, well-organized, and concise proposal—can bring in substantial income for organizational programs.

That being said, not every organization is ready to pursue or receive grant funding. So before an organization starts on the path of seeking grant funding, or attempts to move up from smaller grants to grants of larger amounts, the staff and board should ask itself: Is the organization ready for grant funding or a significant increase in grant funding?

Organizational leadership should start by answering these five sets of questions:

1. Are the organization’s mission, purpose, and goals already well-established and articulated? Does the organization have its strategic plan or annual operating plan in place?
2. Does the organization have solid financial procedures and systems in place? Does it have the ability to effectively track, monitor, and report on how it expends both restricted and unrestricted grant funds?
3. Does the organization have the necessary staff in place to ensure that it can deliver on its stated goals and objectives? Can it do what it promises? If not, does the staff leadership possess the ability to effectively get the right staff in place should the organization be awarded a grant?
4. Is the organizational leadership prepared to do what it takes to meet the requirements that come with receiving grant funding? These requirements may vary greatly depending on the amount and source of the funding, and might include some or all of the following: producing quarterly, semiannual, or annual progress reports (including financial updates relative to the grant); conducting ongoing program evaluation; participating in special training; and attending conferences and meetings (particularly if the funding relates to a special initiative of a foundation). Meeting grant expectations might also require the organization to expand its services, increase its office space, and support staff expansion (with human resources efforts, information technology, and training).
5. Does the organization have solid access to—and understanding of—technology? Foundations of all sizes and focus areas are switching to online submission processes, and many conduct nearly all of their communication with their grantees and prospective grantees via email. In addition, does the organization have an online presence in the form of a website? While not a mandatory tool with most foundations, an organization with a website presents as technologically “in step.” An organization needs to honestly assess whether it has the basic technology in place to communicate with funders and access and engage in the grantseeking process online.
If an organization can answer yes to these five groups of questions, it is well positioned to begin the grantseeking process.

In many instances a well-prepared and clearly articulated proposal can build an organization’s credibility with grantmakers, whether the organization is initially successful in securing a grant or not. Nonprofits that have the respect of grantmakers are often proactively sought after to work on issues of particular concern to both themselves and the funders. Often this funder solicitation comes in the form of a targeted funder initiative. This provides both the grantmaker and the nonprofit with a unique opportunity to collaborate on a larger scale than they would under an individual grant.

More funders of all types (public, private, and operating foundations, as well as some government funders) are engaging in community or issue convenings, or both, as a routine part of their work. Participation in these types of convenings is another solid way to engage potential funders.

Grantseeking is, naturally, the most popular way for nonprofits to secure funding for programs; however, it is but one of several ways an organization can potentially raise funds. There are many different fundraising campaigns that may increase revenues—and visibility—for an organization, including (but not limited to) direct mail and email efforts, social media strategies involving Facebook, Twitter, and various other social media outlets, mobile strategies, membership drives, work place giving, special events, donor giving clubs, “thons” (as in walk-a-thons, dance-a-thons, and jump-a-thons), and more. These strategies should all be kept in mind in addition to grantseeking as a part of a well-rounded fundraising plan. Not only is a diversified fundraising plan something grantmakers like to see, but it is vital to a nonprofit’s ongoing work, as gaining support is important to build shared ownership in the nonprofit by constituents and other supporters, so it remains well grounded. Also, grantseeking is a process that takes time. Some grant cycles take as long as six months from the time a grant proposal is submitted to the time an organization learns whether it has been funded. Then, if an organization is awarded a grant, it might take up to another few weeks before funding is received—which is increasingly being done by wire transfer as opposed to mailing a paper check (once again a reference to the increased need for organizations to have appropriate technology in place). If an organization is in need of immediate funds, writing a grant proposal is not the most effective way to raise it in most cases, although there is always an exception to the rule.

Nonprofit organizations have seen some fairly significant shifts in the funding climate over the last few years, but one thing remains the same, particularly for larger organizations: the vast majority of the funds raised in the private sector come from individuals, not foundations. The chart in Figure I.1 illustrates this point.

FIGURE I.1 2011 Contributions: $298.42 Billion by Source of Contributions (in billions of dollars—all figures are rounded)

Source: Giving USA Foundation, Giving USA 2011: The Executive Summary of the Annual Report on Philanthropy for the Year 2011. Glenview, Ill.: Giving USA Foundation, 2012.


Government funding, delivered through grants from federal, state, and local agencies, adds billions of public dollars that are not factored into the chart in Figure I.1. That said, government funds are typically offered for projects aimed at very narrow target audiences and qualifications, so grantseekers should do their homework to ensure that there is indeed a match worth investing the time to produce these typically onerous grant proposals—it will most certainly take time and clear intention, not to mention the fairly significant due diligence to steward this kind of funding once secured.

Reality Check
All foundations are not created equal. Many—though by no means all—national foundations are, by and large, directing the lion’s share of their grants to larger organizations (national nonprofits, including those with affiliates throughout the nation, major universities, hospitals, museums, and the like). Yet there are literally thousands of local, regional, and statewide foundations that fund various-sized organizations. Smaller and mid-sized foundations are often located in the very communities of the organizations themselves. Therefore, organizations seeking grants need to be diligent about conducting thorough prospect research up front and before the first word is written for any new grant proposals. This is also all the more reason for grantseekers to state their case clearly throughout its proposal.
Categories of Support
Organizations are dynamic and have varied financial needs, which typically fall into one of the following categories:

Operating (general support or unrestricted income). This is the funding nonprofits need to pay rent, utilities, and the other everyday costs associated with running the organization—the basics that allow it to fulfill its mission. Typically, the sources of general operating funds are individuals (through annual fund campaigns, direct mail campaigns, and special events), earned income, and grants.
Program (temporarily restricted income). Program or special project funding is of primary interest to most grantmakers, be they foundations, corporations, or even government agencies. It is funding that organizations receive to start a new program, continue running or expanding an existing program, or launch a time-limited project.
Capacity building. This special project funding is used for a targeted effort to increase an organization’s capacity to better support its mission and fulfill its particular administrative or fundraising goals. Some foundations are willing to invest in capacity-building grants to organizations doing great work.
Capital or equipment. Funds for capital support are often raised through a targeted fundraising drive known as a capital campaign or through seeking special equipment grants. These intensive efforts—designed to generate a specified amount of funds within a specified time period for construction, remodeling and renovation, building expansion, or the purchase of land or equipment—typically involve large-scale individual major gift solicitations, followed by substantial support from foundations and corporations. Some government agencies also provide funds for capital projects.
Endowments. Funds for endowments are often generated through bequests and planned gifts; that is, through giving by an individual to an organization under the terms of a will or trust. Endowment funds may also be received as part of a capital or endowment campaign, using the methods for raising capital or equipment funds. In some cases, a longtime funder dedicated to an organization over a period of time may be willing to make an endowment grant, which may be a way to solidify their support of said nonprofit or may be a part of an exit strategy on the part of the grantmaker, particularly if they have been funding the nonprofit for a while. Generally the endowment principal is held as a long-term investment for the organization, and the interest income is used each year for operating needs.
There are other categories of support that might be considered under one of the categories already outlined or might be stand-alone. These include

Planning. This is the funding nonprofits need to support a continuing process of analyzing program data, making decisions, and formulating plans for action in the future, aimed at achieving program goals.
Research. Funds awarded to institutions to cover costs of investigation and clinical trials. Research grants for individuals are usually referred to as fellowships.
Definitions
Earned income. “Money received by an organization in return for the sale of a product or rendered service.”
Capacity building. “The development of an organization’s core skills and capabilities, such as leadership, management, finance and fundraising, programs, and evaluation, in order to build the organization’s effectiveness and sustainability.”
The Proposal Process
There is no secret or trick to writing a winning grant proposal. The keys to success are

Documenting an unmet community need, which the grantseeker is in a position to address
Developing a clear plan for the program (or operations growth or capital work)
Researching funders thoroughly
Building strong relationships with funders
Targeting proposals carefully
Writing a concise proposal
Whether preparing a proposal for a foundation or a corporation, the process of proposal writing will be essentially the same. Organizations will

Identify an unmet need that said organization can or should address
Determine if other organizations within the community they service are currently attempting to address this unmet need
Develop the plan to meet the need
Determine whether there are potential partners or collaborators
Identify potential funders and begin to build relationships with them
Write the proposals, with each being tailored specifically for one potential funder
Engage in strategic follow-up once the proposal has been submitted
This book covers the proposal process in detail in Steps One through Twelve. The major components of a proposal are as follows:

Cover letter: a short letter that accompanies the proposal and briefly describes its significance
Executive summary (or proposal summary or summary): a very brief (usually one to two pages) overview of the proposal
Problem statement (or statement of need or need statement): a compelling description of the need to be addressed by the grantseeker
Organization background (or background statement): a presentation of the nonprofit’s qualifications to carry out the proposed project
Goals and objectives: a description of what the organization ultimately hopes to accomplish with a program (goal), and a spelling out of the specific results or outcomes to be accomplished (objectives)
Methods (or strategies): a description of the programs, services, and activities that will achieve the desired results
Evaluation: a plan for assessing program accomplishments
Sustainability: a presentation of the nonprofit’s strategies for developing additional funding to continue the program after the initial grant funding is over
Budget: a line-item summary and narrative of program revenues and expenses
A proposal’s format and length will vary depending on the grantmaker. In general, proposals contain the same key components to help funders understand that an organization has a sound plan that meets an important need and will make a positive impact on whomever it serves. The format laid out in this book is commonly used among funders but is by no means the only format possible. In fact, as previously mentioned, many funders large and small are moving to an online grant proposal process. These processes, while sometimes limiting an organization’s ability to go deeper in explanation and details due to space limits, typically follow to a large degree the step-by-step process outlined in this book.

The step-by-step process is a useful and hands-on way to develop an organization’s thoughts and present its program. After following these well-defined steps, it will be much easier to put the results into whatever order the funder requests. The importance of following each grantmaker’s guidelines cannot be emphasized enough. These guidelines will walk grantseekers through each funder’s requirements for proposal development, packaging, and submission. The proposals on the Winning Grants Step by Step, Fourth Edition website show some of the different formats required by different funders. Many foundations belong to a regional association of grantmakers (RAG); RAGs provide education, networking, and services to their members and advocate for foundations’ interests and concerns with policymakers. Members of a RAG may use a common statewide or regional application form (some examples of which can be found on the website), which makes the process of grantseeking easier. Be sure to check with your local RAG to find out if common applications exist in your area.

Types of Proposals
Broadly speaking, there are three types of proposals.

A letter of intent (or letter of inquiry) is generally a two- or three-page summary (though some funders may request a specific number of pages) submitted when the funder wishes to see a brief description of the project before deciding whether to ask for a longer, more detailed proposal. This document must focus on how the proposed project fits the priorities of the funder. It should also clearly describe the need and outline the plan to meet it.

A letter proposal is the type most often requested by corporations. It is typically a three- or four-page description of the project plan, the organization requesting the funds, and the actual request. The letter proposal and the letter of intent are often confused by grantseekers. The difference between a letter proposal and a letter of intent is this: In the letter proposal grantseekers are actually requesting funds. In the letter of intent grantseekers are only introducing their idea to the funder in order to determine whether the funder has an interest in receiving a more detailed proposal.

The long proposal (or full proposal), a format that includes a cover letter and a proposal summary, is the type most often requested by foundations. Corporations should not receive this format unless they specifically request it. Long proposals range from five to twenty-five pages, with most funders being interested in receiving about seven to ten pages, plus attachments. In the longer proposal, the grantseeker has an opportunity to give many details about the project and its importance to the community. When using this longer format, grantseekers should make sure that the funding request—the actual dollar amount—is not hidden. It should appear in the cover letter and in the summary as well as in the body of the proposal.

Foundations employing an online grant submission process will abide by much of what is outlined above, although the space for each step is likely to be more condensed than a typical document proposal, so grantseekers should be prepared for that eventuality.

Tips for Writing Proposals
There are three basic things grantseekers should keep in mind when conceiving their proposals:

1. Picture the reader of the grant as a friendly and fairly educated person who hasn’t been around in a while and doesn’t have a clue about the work of the organization, but she’s interested. What would the grantseeker share to transfer excitement and a sense of mission?
2. Be sure to use compelling facts, but equally important, be sure to tell compelling stories that highlight what the organization does, how it does what it does, and why it matters. Put a face, place, and situation to the facts to make them real.
3. Always keep in mind that a grant is not just a grant; it is an investment on the part of the funder. Foundations have limited resources and are focused on advancing the foundation’s mission. Therefore, it is important to their board and the larger community that they make smart investments.
The heart and soul of an organization’s proposal will come from those who have identified the problem or unmet need and conceptualized the program to address it; they must be an integral part of the proposal development process. Grantseekers need to decide on one person to write the proposal—either the staff person with the strongest writing skills or an outside grantwriter—and have that person working closely with those who developed the program to be funded. Keep in mind that the proposal will suffer if the writer selected—whether internal staff or outside grantwriter—does not have an understanding of what the project is, why it is important to the community, and why the organization seeking funding is best qualified to undertake the project. And even when the writer does have this understanding, it is essential to have the program staff involved in the development of the grant proposal.

Stick to the following principles when preparing the proposal:

Follow the grant guidelines. Organizations do not want their proposal dismissed on a technicality, which happens more than most grantseekers think. It is common for grantmakers to make explicit the format they want followed. Make the proposal visually attractive, but do not overdo it. Whenever possible, break up the written page. Use a reasonable font size, and use bulleted lists and other formatting tools to make each page look inviting—but follow the instructions outlined by each individual funder.
Get the facts straight. Make sure data are relevant and up-to-date to support the need for the program. General data to help set a framework for the statement of need are worthwhile, but the most important data are the facts and figures specific to the geographical area served, target audience, and other key elements.
Do not make the organization’s proposal so bleak that the reader sees no point in trying to address the problem. Use an affirming writing style, and present a well-reasoned, thoughtful presentation. A grant proposal should contain some elements of emotional appeal yet also be realistic and factual.
Be aware that many grantmakers read the executive summary first, followed closely by the program budget. If they go beyond the executive summary and budget—congratulations; at a minimum their interest is sparked. For this reason, grantseekers should consider developing the proposal summary last.
KISS (Keep It Sweet and Simple). Avoid jargon and do not overwrite. Make it easy for someone who probably is not an expert in a particular field to read, understand, and successfully digest the entire proposal. Jargon (specialized words that only people in the relevant field will understand) acts as a barrier to understanding, and people cannot be sympathetic to things they cannot comprehend. Be thrifty with words, particularly now in the age of online proposals, where word limits are typically in place, but do not sacrifice information that is critical to making the case for the project.
Get some honest feedback on the proposal before submitting it to a funder. Ask one or two people (maybe a staff or board member or even someone outside your organization) to review the proposal carefully. Does everything make sense? Is the need clear? Do the proposed objectives (Step Four) and methods (Step Five) seem to be an appropriate response to the identified unmet need? Use the answers to these questions to strengthen the final proposal.
Remember that one size does not fit all. After developing a proposal, study the guidelines of each prospective funder identified as a possible match for the program and tailor the proposal for each one accordingly. It is true that most funders want the same basic information. That said, it is also true that they request it in different formats, which will require reordering sections, cutting and pasting, and possibly relabeling some sections (for instance, the problem statement may become the need statement). Occasionally, additional material may need to be added or some material deleted from the original version. By tailoring the proposal for each funder, each proposal reviewer will potentially be provided with confidence that the proposal is responding to the specific grantmaker’s concerns.
Plan ahead. The grantseeking process typically operates within six-month to nine-month windows, and each funder operates on its own schedule. From the time a proposal is submitted to the time a potential funder responds will be on average six months, and many funders have specific deadlines for receiving proposals. Develop a calendar that lists all foundation and corporation prospects and their deadlines. Also maintain a list of each funder’s priorities that seem applicable to the organization’s desired program, and then be sure to clearly spell out the parts of the organization’s program that fit those priorities. This calendar will help grantseekers stay organized and on track as numerous deadline dates and priority areas are juggled.

Step 1

Developing the Proposal Idea
NOW THAT AN INTRODUCTION to the process of preparing a proposal has been given, let’s take that first step! This section of the workbook walks grantseekers through developing the proposal idea by answering some key questions. Before beginning to write a proposal to secure funds to address an unmet need, grantseekers must first determine which programs in the organization are the most “fundable.” That is, which programs are most likely to garner the most interest from grantmakers?

Many funders have a fairly strong preference for investing in new programs and successful continuing programs that are expanding over general operating support or basic program continuation. Again, be sure to do a thorough job of researching prospective funders so that there is a sense of clarity specific to the audience with which the organization has to work. Funders might also have an interest in a special project, such as a new time-specific project, a capacity-building idea, a set of technology improvements, or technical assistance. This workbook uses the idea of expanding a successful pilot program as the model for developing a proposal.

To start developing a proposal idea, begin with the end in mind. The organization has identified an unmet need, or wants to expand on a program already in existence that is successfully meeting an unmet need. So sit down with everyone involved to begin to flesh out this program idea—how an organization is going to meet, or grow the existing program to continue meeting, that unmet need it has identified. Use a team approach in developing the plan and involve the appropriate staff, clients, and volunteers from the very beginning. The team can develop an initial program plan first or expansion plan, which then will become the basis of the entire proposal.

The importance of having the right people at the table when the program plan is developed cannot be emphasized enough. One of the worst things that can happen to a nonprofit is to be funded for a program that it then discovers it does not have the ability to successfully implement or, worse yet, a program that does not effectively meet the needs initially identified because it was developed in a vacuum—or in the development director’s office—rather than with the individuals who will be responsible for implementing it.

Helpful Hint
General operating support. While still not as available as is needed in the nonprofit arena, there is a growing movement on the part of some funders to invest in general operating support. Be diligent in the research phase of grantseeking to uncover those funders receptive to receiving a general operating proposal.
When preparing a proposal, many writers start with the planning sections (problem statement, goals and objectives, methods, evaluation, program sustainability, and budget) because these sections form the core of the proposal. Then they write the organization background section, finishing with the summary and the cover letter. This workbook follows that format, which is easily adaptable to online proposal submissions as well.

The planning sections of the proposal deserve careful attention; without a clearly articulated program plan, it is nearly impossible to get funding. Writing a clear, goal-oriented, thoughtful proposal is crucial. If a grantseeker can’t clearly and effectively explain what they’re doing, why they’re doing it, and how they’re going to do it in a way that is easily understandable, staff at grantmaking institutions will not have what they need to advocate on the organization’s behalf.

A guideline here is that nonprofits should expect to focus approximately 70 percent of their time on program planning; the other 30 percent can be dedicated to writing and packaging the proposal. Also, the tighter an organization’s program plan, the easier the proposal will be to write. Go into this process knowing that even with all of the planning, fine-tuning of the plan will be necessary as the proposal is being developed—this is common practice.

Logic Models in Program Design
What exactly is a logic model? A logic model is a valuable tool that produces a basic program picture that shows how the organization’s program is intended to work. The tool also helps organizations outline the sequence of related events in their programs. These events provide a direct and visual connection between the need for the planned program and the desired results and outcomes expected from the program. A logic model can be particularly useful when it comes to designing the evaluation for a new program. More information on logic models, including examples and online tools, can be found on the website, including actual logic model building portals.

Reality Check
Check the fit. When conducting prospect research, grantseekers are bound to come across many wonderful opportunities presented by grantmakers—special initiatives and pots of funding for specific programs and projects within defined fields of interest. And even though they might sound exciting and worthwhile, always measure every funding opportunity by the organization’s mission. Is there really a fit—a natural fit? Or is the organization “growing another foot” to fit the “shoe” the funder has to offer? Always, always use the organization’s mission and organizational purpose as the primary guide.
To get started on developing a compelling proposal idea, complete Worksheet 1.1. The more thorough the answers, the more helpful the worksheet will be. After answering the questions in Worksheet 1.1, use those answers to identify one specific idea to develop using the exercises in this book. To check the merit of the idea identified, ask the Proposal Development Review Questions at the end of this step. Then follow Steps Two through Twelve to create a well-planned proposal. Throughout these steps, this workbook will refer grantseekers to the accompanying website for worksheet examples and templates.

WORKSHEET 1.1: Proposal Idea Questionnaire




Winning Grants Step by Step, Fourth Edition. Copyright © 2013 by John Wiley & Sons, Inc. All rights reserved.
Proposal Development Review Questions
To find out whether the proposal idea being presented has merit, answer the following six questions:

1. What community need does the program or service that the organization has identified address? (The answer to this question will become the framework for the proposal’s need statement.)
2. What would an improved community situation look like? (This answer will become the basis of the proposal’s goals and objectives.)
3. What can the organization do to improve this situation? (This answer will become the basis of the proposal’s methods.)
4. How will the organization know if its program or service has succeeded? (This answer will become the basis of the proposal’s program evaluation.)
5. How much will the organization’s program or service cost, and what other sources of funding will it have? (This answer will become the basis of the proposal’s program budget.)
6. How will the organization’s program or service be funded in the future? (This answer will become the basis of the proposal’s program sustainability.)
Now that the organization’s proposal idea is successfully identified and framed, let’s move on to Step Two, which addresses a critical part of winning grants: developing relationships with funders.

Step 2
Developing Relationships with Funders
BUILDING RELATIONSHIPS WITH FUNDERS is a long-term, sincere, and strategic investment of time and intention. Once it is determined that an organization’s proposed program is solid, time and focused effort needs to be invested in identifying funders who are potentially a match with both the organization and its proposed program, project, or special initiative. Resources on the Winning Grants Step by Step, Fourth Edition website offer links to other sites with detailed information and tips on how to effectively conduct prospect research to successfully identify possible funders. Step Two also provides no-nonsense advice about prospect research and then offers ideas for developing relationships once funders are identified. Please refer to Resource A (What Is a Foundation?) to learn more about what foundations are and how they work.

Making the Initial Approach
A grantmaker’s website typically holds all the information grantseekers need to determine whether it is a match. In fact, in this day and age, it is now fairly commonplace for all grant guidelines and supporting materials to be on the website; funders are “going green” in every way and reducing paper consumption. So not only are grant guidelines online but, as mentioned in the Introduction, grant proposals are now routinely submitted online and paperless. Typically, grantseekers will find an abundance of information, including—but by no means limited to—background information on the foundation as an institution, its staff and board of directors, grant guidelines, and special funding initiatives, if any. Most funder websites will also proudly feature current and previous grantees or the programs successfully funded. Foundations, like all 501(c)3 organizations, are required by law to provide access to their Internal Revenue Service Form 990, which is their annual tax return. Many may have a link to this document on their websites, or they can be located by visiting Guide Star (www.guidestar.org) or the Foundation Center (www.foundationcenter.org).

These success stories provide the very best indicators of what specific funders are likely to fund in the future. Some funders may have additional microsites (separate sites that are linked to the main site) for particular funding initiatives they have launched. That said, other funders may still require additional sleuthing on the part of the grantseeker before they can appropriately glean whether there is truly a match. So in addition to reviewing funder websites, grantseekers should use various search engines to research their previous giving to other organizations and perhaps also to look for feature stories about them (if not found on their websites) or pick up the telephone and call a foundation directly.

But be prepared: this conversation just might lead to a brief discussion of the proposed project or program, so the caller should be ready to talk about it and hit the highlights. Who knows? This may be the start of a great new relationship. After reviewing a grantmaker’s website and other related materials, determine clarity around there being a potentially solid fit between the organization’s proposed program or project and what the grantmaker says it is interested in funding. Grantseekers need to recognize that the relationship they make with foundation staff is one based on mutual need; they then need to be on a mission to educate foundation staff on what they need from the grantseeker’s organization.

In addition, it is important not to assume that funders know and understand the grantseeking organization’s mission or target audience or that the program being presented is addressing a priority of theirs.

Developing the Relationship
After establishing that there is a good fit, relationship building becomes a continuous process that begins before a single word of a proposal is written, and it spans many years. Keep in mind that it is a relationship, rather than a transaction. Good communication with funders should never end, even if and when the organization may stop receiving grants from them. Once a relationship exists, funders like to receive progress reports about how the organization or program they funded is doing. They may also take an interest in other compelling ideas that the organization has developed.

It’s not always easy to develop relationships with funders, especially if they have not previously funded an organization. However, the key is the relationship part of that phrase. It’s relationship building, rather than selling, that makes a difference.

Here are a few concrete ways to approach a funder to open the door to relationship building. These are discussed more fully in the following subsections.

Send the funder a brief email inquiry.
Call the foundation and speak with someone regarding your proposal idea.
Send a brief (no longer than two pages maximum) letter of inquiry to the funder.
Invite the funder to your organization for a site visit.
While grant guidelines determine a nonprofit’s initial approach, grantseekers may have a connection to the funder, either directly or through one or more contacts who can potentially open a door on behalf of the organization for an initial meeting or phone conversation.

Reality Check
Be strategic and err on the side of restraint when using a contact to open a door with a funder. Few things are worse than dealing with a program officer who feels pushed into a meeting. Grantseekers always want an invitation, rather than a meeting based on obligation. Think “soft touch” rather than “heavy hand.”
Sending Email Inquiries to Funders
Many funders offer grantseekers the option of contacting them via email with questions and funding inquiries. Some grantmakers even provide direct email access to their program officers from their websites; others may have an “info@” email that is routed to the appropriate staff person after review. In either case, email is a valuable tool for stimulating further, more meaningful, contact because it provides an opportunity for a brief introduction as a staff person, as well as the organization represented and the program needing funding. At the same time it gives the program officer the time he needs to review the information and potentially respond. Email is far less demanding for program officers than a phone call and less wasteful than paper documents. And given the significant shift from paper to electronic processes, email is all the more important. The key is to keep it brief! Resist the urge to write a mini proposal in the email. Grantseekers can also request an in-person meeting or time for a phone conversation in the email, which then provides the funder with options for responding to the communication.

Contacting a Funder by Telephone
Before calling a funder to pitch an idea, be prepared. The person with whom a grantseeker speaks may have only a short time for a conversation, so preparation is essential. Be ready to provide the highlights of the organization’s program within a ten- to fifteen-minute conversation. This time frame includes the time it may take for the person to ask for clarification of any points. Grantseekers should remember that they are not selling their organization’s program to a funder; they are attempting to make a connection between the program and the funding institution’s interest areas. To actively build a long-term relationship with the funder and with this particular representative, careful and engaged listening to the funder’s needs and providing information the funder wants is extremely important.

In listening to the funder’s needs, one might discover—sometimes very early in the conversation—that there in fact is not a match between the organization’s program and the funder’s current funding priorities; that is why grantseekers should have one or two other program ideas in mind to present as a backup. Do not waste this opportunity with the funder; be fully prepared with information on clearly identified unmet needs that may fit into the funder’s interest areas.

Writing a Letter of Inquiry
A letter of inquiry (or LOI) is sometimes the first step in a funder’s grantmaking process, particularly if the relationship between prospective grantee and funder is new. An LOI provides the funder with a “sneak peek” at the organization, target audience, and prospective program, without requiring the grantseeker to develop a full proposal at this early stage. After the funder has reviewed the information presented in the LOI, the organization may or may not be invited to submit a full proposal. Even though an LOI is a preliminary step, it should be treated as a vital part of relationship building. It is an integral first interaction of what grantseekers hope will be many interactions with the funder. If asked to submit an LOI, check to see whether the funder has specific LOI guidelines. If it does not, the following list suggests what information to include, as a general rule:

Organization’s mission and related programs
The need the organization wishes to meet
The outcomes expected from the organization’s project
General details of how an organization will conduct the project
The potential fit between the funder and the organization
The sample LOI included in this step presents to a funder the Swim 4 Life Program, which will be used as an example program throughout this workbook. This is the letter that the Swim 4 Life program executive director would submit if an LOI was invited by the funder or if the funder accepted unsolicited submissions.

Sample Letter of Inquiry
July 17, 2012
Wendy Wonder
President
XYZ Foundation
0000 Clinton Avenue, Suite 2330
Anytown, Any State 02009
Dear Ms. Wonder:
I appreciate the time Anne Jonas has taken to communicate with us about how our programs fit with the XYZ Foundation’s funding priorities, and the encouragement she offered us. Therefore, on behalf of the Board of Directors and staff, I am honored to submit this brief Letter of Inquiry introducing Swim 4 Life, an innovative swimming instruction program by Jane Swimmer, a former U.S. Olympic swimming hopeful and hometown hero. We respectfully request your consideration of a grant of $25,000 to help us expand our programs for low-income youth from two to three schools in the Gathenton School District.
Established as a 501(c)3 organization in 2008, the mission of the Swim 4 Life program is to empower youth in the underserved communities throughout King County through high-quality programs to utilize the discipline of swimming to improve physical fitness, nurture self-esteem, and acquire the confidence to advance their lives. This mission is currently being fulfilled through programs currently operated at Arthur Schomburg Middle School in South Spring and the Rockmore Education Complex High School in Abbington. More than 450 youth have participated since operations began, and we would now like to add Cooperville Middle School, also located in Abbington.
The need for programs like Swim 4 Life is enormous in the communities we serve. Swimming has not been a popular sport in African American or Latino communities in some measure as a result of various factors including access to pools and other safe places to swim. Historically speaking, African Americans were denied access to public pools prior to the civil rights movement—and after in many instances. As a result, this population turned to water holes, ponds, and other unsupervised alternatives, which led to rates of drowning among people of color that far exceed those of whites. For example, according to the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention’s latest report in early 2012, the drowning rate for African Americans between the ages of five and fourteen was more than three times that for whites.
Through a range of summer and after-school services, the Swim 4 Life program teaches children to be “water safe” and to swim, and prepares them for competitive team training if they want to further develop their skills. Our program at one school even provides swim instruction specifically for students with disabilities. Our partnership with the Gathenton School District offers us the opportunity to replicate the programs throughout the cities of Rockmore and South Spring in King County, contributing to improved health and fitness of hundreds of youth who have been excluded from the sport because of limited access to safe pools.
With your help, we will expand our program from two to three schools in the Gathenton School District and achieve the following specific programmatic outcomes with the low-income students and students of color we plan to serve in 2012:
100 students participate in water aerobics classes, which will enable nonswimmers to participate, since classes are conducted in shallow water
25 students are trained as Junior Lifeguards and Lifeguards, including seven at Rockmore Education Complex (a high school)
58 students participate on a swim team
37 students participate in swim fitness classes, workouts for students who already know how to swim and are looking for an exercise alternative as a part of a healthier lifestyle
13 students participate on a water polo team (Note: In previous years, we found that not one of our students even knew what water polo was until the program introduced it as an option)
29 students with Individualized Education Programs (IEP) complete the Adapted Learn-to-Swim class
39 students complete the Learn-to-Swim class
The outcomes listed above represent a 25% increase in the numbers of students we will serve.
Because of your commitment to encouraging low-income youth and young people of color to reach their fullest potential, as well as your geographic focus in King County, we sincerely hope that the XYZ Foundation will join us as our partner in this important program.
The Swim 4 Life Program budget is $468,800, of which $150,000 remains to be raised. So as you can see, your gift of $25,000 for the expanded program will go a long way toward helping us meet our budget. In addition, investing in Swim 4 Life will make a significant impact on the ability of economically disadvantaged King County, Any State, youth to create a brighter future for themselves. If you have any questions, please feel free to call me at (111) 111–1111. We deeply appreciate your invitation of this Letter of Inquiry and trust that you will see enough of a connection between our program and your foundation’s mission that you will invite a full proposal.
Sincerely,
Shawn Jones, Executive Director
Now that a sample LOI has been presented and reviewed, take the time to answer the questions in Worksheet 2.1, which is located both at the end of this chapter and on the Winning Grants Step by Step, Fourth Edition companion website, as clearly as possible. This exercise will help in developing a strong letter of inquiry for funders. If grantseekers cannot clearly and articulately answer the questions, that probably means that they need to gather more information before they can effectively complete an LOI.

WORKSHEET 2.1: Letter of Inquiry Questionnaire 

Winning Grants Step by Step, Fourth Edition. Copyright © 2013 by John Wiley & Sons, Inc. All rights reserved.
Meeting with a Funder
Many grantseekers dream of having face-to-face meetings with prospective funders prior to submitting a proposal because they want not only to get clarification from the funders on key issues but also an opportunity to “prime the pump” and get the grantmakers excited about the program even before they receive the proposal. Unfortunately, preproposal funder meetings are few and far between, because funders simply cannot accommodate every nonprofit’s request for them. Also, some funders are leery of these meetings because they do not want to raise unrealistic funding expectations in grantseekers. Managing grantseeker expectations is of the utmost importance to the majority of funders: they certainly want to encourage the submission of solid proposals for programs meeting their interest areas, but they do not want to raise false hope at the same time. Remember: every foundation and corporate grantmaker has a limited amount of funding available for grants every year. That said, if an organization has a contact that already has a strong relationship with a funder, this individual may be able to help broker a meeting. After doing the due diligence of funder research, grantseekers should think about others they know who may also know the funder. Understand also that any early meeting secured with the grantmaker will be very preliminary and in no way ensures that the grantseeker will receive funds from this source.

If an in-person meeting is scheduled, grantseekers should take materials that best describe the organization and the proposed program. In the meeting the grantseeker should attempt to cover the following topics:

Credibility of the organization
Need for the proposed project
Program description
Community interest in the program
Proposed outcomes
Ability to measure success
Costs and projected revenue sources
Why this funder’s interests may be met by investing in the program
Time with a program officer is likely to be short, so organizations should be prepared to hit the highlights. Listen carefully to the funder’s questions and any concerns expressed, and make sure questions are answered fully and truthfully. These questions and concerns should also be addressed again in the proposal that will be submitted following the meeting, provided there is a good fit.

Here are some additional steps to take to develop good relationships with funders with whom the grantseeker has spoken:

Add the program officer to the organization’s mailing list or list serve
Add the program officer to the organization’s newsletter distribution list, and go the extra distance by including a personal note with his newsletter
Send brief (one- to two-page) progress reports on the successes of the organization’s work—ones that the program officer has not funded but that his colleagues at other funding institutions may have funded
Invite the program officer to organization events with personal notes—even if she cannot come, she will remember the contact
Contact the program officer occasionally by telephone or email with brief messages and updates. Include quotes or even notes specifically from program constituents
Reality Check
Electronic applications. These come in the form of either an actual web-based portal that grantseekers essentially fill out/fill in, and grant guidelines that instruct grantseekers to email the proposal and required attachments, rather than mailing paper copies. The web-based grant proposal portals have a specific space for each proposal component, and they are sometimes limited in the number of words per section. Among funders using electronic applications are the W. K. Kellogg Foundation (www.wkkf.org), The Skoll Foundation (www.skollfoundation.org), The Agnes and Eugene Meyer Foundation (www.meyerfoundation.org/apply-for-funding), and the Hertz Foundation (www.dothertzfoundation/org/dz/fellowships/application.aspx). Please visit any one of these foundation websites to see clear examples of online application processes. There are more examples located on the Winning Grants Step by Step, Fourth Edition website.
Letter of Inquiry Review Questions
1. Is the name of the program and amount of request clearly stated in the first paragraph?
2. Does the second paragraph elaborate further on the proposed project, as well as any related projects (when applicable)?
3. Is the organization’s mission statement included?
4. Is the need the proposed program intends to meet clear? Are some preliminary data to support the need for the proposed program included?
5. Are the specific program outcomes the program is targeted to achieve described clearly?
6. Is program implementation included?
7. Is the “fit” or natural connection between the organization’s program and the funder’s priority areas, as identified in their guidelines, included?
8. If there is some funding already committed to the project, and is it mentioned?
9. Is the program’s contact person clearly identified, including all contact information?
Developing relationships with funders is such an important step in the process of winning grants that the value of doing it well cannot be emphasized enough. Now that funder relationships have been explained and helpful hints provided, it’s time to develop the problem statement, which is Step Three.


Step 3
Writing a Compelling Problem Statement
THIS STEP HIGHLIGHTS THE KEY ELEMENTS of a problem statement (for grantseeking purposes this statement might also be referred to as the statement of the need or need statement), including the four requirements for it to be successful. The section also offers a worksheet and sample to serve as guides to preparing a problem statement for a proposal.

Purpose of the Problem Statement
What is the problem to be addressed? An organization’s problem statement will—or at least it should—directly address this question. Therefore this is the best place to begin writing a proposal. A problem statement sets the framework for the entire proposal, as it describes a critical condition, set of conditions, or a social need affecting certain people or things in a specific place at a specific time. The need statement is fundamental to a proposal because funders must agree with the organization that the program addresses an important community problem. Bolstered by accurate data (quantitative statistics) combined with the right selection of stories that provide a more personal illustration of the need (qualitative data), a compelling need statement is often the first component that motivates a funder to give serious consideration to a nonprofit’s request. Make no mistake: a good, solid, and well-supported problem statement is the key that unlocks the door, moving a proposal that much closer to funding consideration.

Finally, the unmet need—and an organization’s ability to successfully address it—gives grantmakers an opportunity to realize their own goals.

Content of the Problem Statement
Here are some basic rules to follow when developing the project’s problem statement:

The need being addressed in the statement should have a clear relationship to an organization’s mission and purpose.
The problem statement should focus squarely on those the organization serves and their specific needs, rather than the organization’s needs—unless an organizational capacity-building grant is being sought.
Any assertions about the problem should be well supported with evidence (statistical facts, expert views, trends found in the experience of doing the work, and so on).
The organization must be able to directly connect—and substantiate—the need described in the proposal with the organization’s ability to successfully respond to that need (that ability will be described in a subsequent section of the proposal).
The problem statement must be easily digestible. Avoid using jargon, and do not make the reader have to work to understand the point. Graphs and charts with data to support the case are often good additions to a proposal, as they present the data in the most compelling way.
The problem being addressed by the organization may be specific to its geographical area or it may be found in many communities. Do not overpromise: if the problem occurs in an area larger than that served by the organization or the proposed program, it is important to focus only on what the organization or program can reasonably accomplish. Should this be the case—the problem exceeds the boundaries of the organization or proposed program—consider positioning the program as a potential model for other nonprofits in other locations. By taking the model approach, an organization broadens the pool of potential funders to include those concerned with the problem in other geographical areas. Consideration should also be given to conducting research to discover whether other organizations in the service area have—or are developing—similar programs to address the same problem. Should this be the case, consider exploring a collaborative program that would leverage and expand the reach of program plans and grant funds.

If the organization decides to take either the model or collaborative approach, highlight this fact in the problem statement; the organization is addressing the need on a larger level through the development of a program that can be a model for others or that it is leveraging its efforts with another organization so it can expand the reach and impact of its program.

Often arts organizations struggle with this section owing to a perception that the arts do not meet a compelling community need. However, arts organizations should be encouraged, as they do meet important needs. Without these nonprofits, certain cultures and traditions would be lost, lives would not be enriched, and young people would not learn new and different ways of expressing themselves. The same holds true for social justice organizations who may struggle with how to quantify social change. Over the last few years, there has been more research in this area, and the website offers some data, studies, and overall guidance on how best to frame social justice outcomes.

For general support grants, there might be a struggle with the problem statement because the proposal addresses the general work of the organization. Focus on describing the problems that the organization addresses: mission and purpose. This, again, goes back to something touched on earlier in this workbook: when focusing on soliciting general operating support, always use the nonprofit’s mission and purpose as the guide.

Definition
Collaboration. “A mutually beneficial and well-defined relationship entered into by two or more organizations to achieve common goals. The relationship includes a commitment to mutual relationships and goals, a jointly developed structure and shared responsibility, mutual authority and accountability for success, and sharing of resources and rewards.”
Tips for Writing the Problem Statement
The problem statement should be contained to no more than three pages. Being concise with the problem statement will serve grantseekers well, and the reality is that most foundation guidelines limit proposals to ten to twelve pages in total; corporate guidelines typically limit proposals to even fewer pages. Space constricts even more with the online proposal portals, as they literally limit the space to a specific number of words.

In stating the problem, use hard statistics from reputable sources and steer clear of assumptions and undocumented assertions masquerading as legitimate facts.

Use statistics that are clear and that document the current unmet need or problem. If talking about a specific community within a city, offer one or two data points about the city, then zero in on the data specific to that community.
Use comparative statistics and research where possible. Look at the examples in the accompanying Reality Check box. As shown, using data from a community that did something very similar to what the grantseeker wants to do and citing the benefits that the community derived from the project can make a strong case for the nonprofit to do the same.
Quote authorities who have spoken on the topic. Be sure to cite the person who made each statement and the source where it was found, and if appropriate, provide backup information that substantiates that this person is indeed an authority on the subject matter.
Make sure all data collection is well documented. Grantseekers will use the Internet for research, which is of course more than appropriate. Just make sure that the websites being referenced are reputable and the links are both accurate and current; then clearly cite the sources.
Use touching stories of people as examples. This is very effective, but only when balanced against hard data. Keep in mind that foundations vary in what they seek in terms of the right mix of vignettes and numbers.
Give a clear sense of the urgency of the request. Funders need to understand why the funding is important now.
Take a look at the following Sample Problem Statement from the Swim 4 Life program. Then, using the proposal idea identified and developed in Step One, answer the questions on Worksheet 3.1, as this will assist in beginning to define the need the organization is addressing. After reviewing the Sample Problem Statement and completing the worksheet questionnaire, write the organization’s problem statement based on the information developed. Next answer the Problem Statement Review Questions listed at the end of this step to make sure the statement is written well. Rewrite the problem statement until all the review questions are satisfactorily addressed.

Sample Problem Statement
The need for programs like Swim 4 Life is enormous in the communities we serve. Swimming has not been a popular sport in African American or Latino communities in some measure as a result of various factors including access to safe pools. Historically speaking, African Americans were denied access to public pools. As a result, they turned to water holes, ponds, and other unsupervised alternatives, which led to rates of drowning among people of color that far exceed those of whites. For example, according to the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention’s latest report in early 2012, the drowning rate for African Americans between the ages of five and fourteen was more than three times that for whites.
To this day, a deep-seated fear about swimming has discouraged African Americans and, to a lesser yet still significant degree, Latinos in the United States from participating in the activity. A story relayed to us by a previous program participant:
Our family is originally from Louisiana, though many of us moved to Any State after Hurricane Katrina. Those of my family who stayed in Louisiana were having a family picnic a few years ago by a waterway, and not one person at the picnic could swim. A few of the kids were playing at the water’s edge when the land gave way and all fell into the water. Nine of my family members died that day—seven kids and two adults who tried to help them. I promised myself that if I ever got the chance, not only would I learn to swim, but I would become a lifeguard.
According to our most recent survey of current and previous program participants, nearly 75 percent of those surveyed have family members who have drowned or experienced a traumatic water incident and are terrified of drowning themselves.
Arthur Schomburg Middle School, one of the program sites, is located in a part of South Spring that offers children and youth little in the way of public resources and facilities for sports, especially swimming. A county facility, Thurgood Marshall Park, 1.7 miles from the school, has a seasonal swim program, open only during the summer even though the pool is indoor and heated. Rosa Parks and Garfield Recreation Centers, twelve miles from the school, have indoor heated pools that open during the summer but are not accessible to young students after school; they would have to cross major thoroughfares to get there.
Most experts agree that children approaching adolescence are particularly vulnerable to peer influences, and for youth living in disadvantaged neighborhoods, the lack of positive opportunities often puts them at risk for gang affiliation, substance abuse, and/or low academic performance. A report issued by the Urban Institute in 2011 detailed the risks, obstacles, and positive strategies needed relative to middle school children from low-income families. According to the study, it is a prime time to introduce innovative and challenging youth sports programs—those not typically available in communities of color—as exciting alternatives to unhealthy risk-taking activities. The Swim 4 Life program in King County, Any State, is designed to take advantage of this age group’s interest in experimentation and exploration.
The city of Abbington is served by the program site at the Rockmore Education Complex. It is the most densely populated city in the state, with 8,552 people occupying every square mile, compared with an overall average of 2,093 people per square mile in other cities. It has the highest crime rate in the state, and the poverty rate is 46 percent, nearly twice that of South Spring. Fifty-one percent of children under the age of 18 live in poverty, compared with 31 percent in South Spring, and less than 20 percent the rest of the state. Young people in this city—and South Spring—clearly live under stressful conditions and could benefit greatly from structured and supervised physical activity, as well as safe opportunities for fun and positive engagement. And for all of the reasons outlined, we have selected Cooperville Middle School, also located in Abbington, to expand our program.
A swim program offers many advantages over other physical activities. Swimming is an excellent form of exercise because all the muscles of the body are used, and it requires a constant supply of oxygen to the muscles, making it a mainly aerobic exercise. It is also a gateway to all aquatic sports and is considered one of the important life-saving skills. Many studies such as the one conducted in 2012 by the Center for Research on Effective School for Disadvantaged Youth at the Johns Hopkins University have drawn a connection between participation in structured athletic programs and academic achievement. Yet today, students in local high schools, particularly in the eleventh and twelfth grades, have so many academic requirements that there is not enough time for physical education, even as an elective.
WORKSHEET 3.1: Statement of Problem Questionnaire

Winning Grants Step by Step, Fourth Edition. Copyright © 2013 by John Wiley & Sons, Inc. All rights reserved.
Problem Statement Review Questions
Once a problem statement is completed, answer the following six questions to see whether what has been developed hits the mark:

1. Is the problem statement focused on those who will be served by the program (and not on your organization)?
2. Does the problem statement directly connect to the organization’s mission statement?
3. Given the organization’s size and resources, can it address the problem in a meaningful way?
4. Is the problem statement adequately supported by solid and reputable quantitative and qualitative data on the nature, size, and scope of the need to be addressed?
5. Is it sweet and simple (remember KISS from a previous chapter)?
6. Is the problem statement persuasive without being wordy?
Reality Check
Avoid the trap of circular reasoning, which commonly occurs in problem statements. To use the Foundation Center’s definition and example, circular reasoning occurs when “you present the absence of your solution as the actual problem. Then your solution is offered as the way to solve the problem. For example, ‘The problem is that we have no pool in our community. Building a pool will solve the problem.’”
This statement does not communicate a problem: communities across the country thrive with no community pool. However, if it was stated that a community pool in the neighborhood would specifically address certain challenges the community is facing, and if followed up by citing a similar community where a community pool has had a positive impact in ways that are documented, it could potentially build a compelling argument that would provide the context for the problem statement.
The program’s need is now established. Developing the program’s goals and objectives is next, which is Step Four.